Transcript: What is Inheritance?
Updated automatically every 5 minutes
BYU-Idaho Online Learning

Video Transcript

What is Inheritance?

[One speaker] 

[The video talks about DNA. It has several images of DNA strings, people of different ages, different nationalities, etc. All images that support DNA diversification.]

{Speaker}: When living things reproduce, they pass DNA to their offspring. Through asexual reproduction, some living things can reproduce without a partner. Offspring made this way are genetically identical to the parent. Other living things, like people, reproduce with a partner. This is called sexual reproduction. Offspring made this way inherit equal amounts of DNA from two parents. Each of us has 2 copies of every gene. The two copies may be the same, or they may be different. The combined output from all of our genes influences our inherited traits.

When a couple has children, each parent passes down one copy of each of their genes. For each gene, which copy is passed along is random and it may be different for each child. Each child gets a unique combination of copies of all of their parents genes. This mixing contributes to genetic variation. Because they share genes, children resemble their parents and each other. But unique gene combinations give each individual a unique set of inherited characteristics.

Looking farther back in the family tree, the parents DNA came from their parents. So the children also share DNA with their grandparents. But the amount they share with each grandparent is only half as much as they share with each parent. Looking back to the great grandparents, the children share DNA with all of them, but only half again as much. This inheritance pattern explains why you have more genes in common with closer relatives, like your mom, then you do with more distant relatives, like your great grandmother. In this way, your DNA holds a record of your family relationships.

[End of Video]


Transcript: What are Traits?
Updated automatically every 5 minutes
BYU-Idaho Online Learning

Video Transcript

What are Traits?

[Animated wooden people are shown in many different colors. A woman begins to speak. As she explains traits, the wooden people demonstrate the traits.] 

Narrator: We are all unique.

[There are now 3 different colored wooden people, their bodies divided into stackable chunks of different shades.]

Each of us has a combination of characteristics, or traits. That is different from anyone else’s.

[Two of the people open their eyes, and the third opens to reveal bright blue eyes. One of them develops freckles, and the middle person grows taller.]

Some traits are easy to see, like eye color, height, and freckles. [The blue-eyed person coughs, and the tall one begins to sing.]

Others are less visible, like asthma, musical talent, and disease risk.

Some traits are inherited, and some are shaped by the environment.

[A new wooden person is introduced, but this one has legs, hair, and a nose. She stands near two other wooden people, a mother and a father.]

Eye color and nose shape are inherited traits. They are controlled by genes, which we inherit from our parents. The language we speak, and the music we like are shaped by the environment. Which includes our culture, our experiences, and our physical surroundings.

[The family laughs as music plays in the background. Two new wooden people appear.]

Most traits are influenced by both genes and the environment.

[A child appears. An apple is dropped into his hands and he grows a little.]

For example, tall parents tend to have tall children, but height is also influenced by nutrition.

[Two new people appear, an old man and a young boy. The boy is doing jumping-jacks as the adult man watches.]

And while diabetes tends to run in families, some types can be controlled by diet and exercise.

[Two new people appear, a young woman with a slender body type and a tall young man with a basketball.]

Even when someone is born with a body type that is suited to dancing or play basketball, it takes training and practice to learn these skills.

[All of the previous wooden people are shown talking and eating together.]

Together, our genes and our experiences make us who we are.

[End of the video.]



Transcript: DNA, Chromosomes, Genes, and Traits: An Intro to Hereditary
Updated automatically every 5 minutes
BYU-Idaho Online Learning

Video Transcript

DNA, Chromosomes, Genes, and Traits: An Intro to Hereditary

[One Speaker]

[The video is all cartoon depictions.]

[With triumphant music, the screen displays two cartoon Amoeba “girls” and a DNA strand with the words, “The Amoeba Sisters: DNA, Chromosomes, Genes, & Traits”. The music finishes]

[A bare classroom is shown with desks, an empty bulletin board, and a chalk board with “Biology” written on it.]

Speaker: The week before the 1st day of my first year of teaching…wow, over a decade ago [one amoeba sister appears looking down and confused, then disappears from the screen again]…was an exciting time [streamers and confetti are in the classroom]. It was also stressful because I’m a bit of a perfectionist [the amoeba sister is at the desk with the speech bubble, “Everything must be perfect!”]---but a bit of a messy, unable to decorate my classroom kind of perfectionist [the amoeba is behind a student desk with dark-rimmed eyes]---actually maybe I’m not a perfectionist.

[The classroom now has a banner along the top that says, “I love science”, drawings of cells on the chalkboard, microscopes, and a decorated bulletin board.]

I wanted to make my classroom inviting and exciting and I really wanted my students to walk in and think, “This is AMAZING.” I could never make it look like what I imagined up. [one amoeba student is looking nervous, and one is about to cry. The classroom has a wilted, dead plant, haphazardly placed sticky notes on the teacher desk, trash on the floor, and very few decorations in the room or on the bulletin board]

But, the most amazing thing did happen in the week to follow [the amoeba sister appears on the screen, looking excited]. I knew a colleague who had a friend who had a son who was going to college [there is an amoeba with an arrow to the right, another amoeba, an arrow to the right, and then a smaller amoeba with a baseball cap on]-- confusing-- but anyway, that son could not take his pet snake to college with him. Some rule about dorms and snakes [The smaller amoeba standing by a suitcase has a snake around his body, and the amoeba looks sad. The screen changes to show the amoeba greeting a new roommate with the snake around him, and the roommate looks alarmed]. My colleague asked, “Would you like it? They said they’d give you the cage and everything; it could be a classroom pet.” [One amoeba is on the phone with the amoeba sister, and images of the snake cage, a tree branch, and the sun lamp appear above them speaking.]

I didn’t even have to think about it. Of course [the amoeba sister has her mouth open and sparkles in her eyes]. So Spike, a Texas rat snake, became a classroom pet, an amazing, popular one at that. [The snake appears on the screen. He is brown with darker spots. He has sunglasses on, and green arrows for the popularity of Spike are all over the screen.] He was friendly---well, for a snake… he’d let you hold him and not bite [a student holds the snake, and the snake squints in an annoyed look, but a caption says, “This is the face of patience.”].

That year, I was the only one in the science wing with a pet snake and I’m pretty sure there were some people that wondered what was the point. [A diagram of the science classrooms appears, with a pin of the snake in one of the rooms. The screen changes to show the sister holding the snake, with some students gossiping, saying, “Do you think they were out of hamsters?”] Well, I’m big on relevance so anytime I would teach a biology concept, I found some way to work in Spike. Predation? Well, let’s talk about Spike’s appetite for rats [the word “Predation” is on the screen, with a rat saying, “Bring it!” and a Spike with his mouth open in excitement]. Mitosis? Let’s talk about why Spike even needs to make more cells [the word “Mitosis” is on the screen, with cells from Spike showing replication].

One day in tutorials, a student asked me, “Since Spike’s parents were bred in captivity, did you ever see Spike’s parents? Do you think Spike’s parents looked like him?” [A student has speech bubbles with images of two snakes similar to Spike, and then another speech bubble with an image of Spike. The amoeba sister looks excited on the right of the screen]] You can’t ask a question like that and not expect an answer! It was a GREAT question because we were getting close to our heredity unit.

Heredity is about how traits are passed down from parent to offspring [there are two images of the male and female snake connected by a line, and then a vertical line connects the two of them to Spike. DNA is pictured in the background]. We’ve made a playlist of our videos that focus on heredity, including: reproduction, how to track inheritance in pedigrees, how to solve genetic problems in Punnett squares, and understanding different Mendelian and non-Mendelian inheritance [images of each of these videos appears on the screen]. But you really can’t delve into those and study heredity without understanding DNA, chromosomes, genes, and traits- and that’s what this introductory video is going to focus on. [The other amoeba sister looks at a DNA strand that has a speech bubble saying, “Once you get to my level of fame, everyone wants to know everything about you.”]

So back to the student question. Spike has traits. The patterns on his body, his size---these are all traits. These traits are coded for in his DNA. [The screen zooms in on Spike’s scales,shows a tape measure and then shows a strand of DNA.] Some of the traits he inherited can be influenced by the environment. [The screen has a bubble map of “Examples of Environmental Conditions” with branched-off bubbles of “UV Light” and rats.] For example, if Spike had not had the nourishment he needed [the rat bubble is circled], that could affect his size. DNA is not just one big code buried deep down in an organism like some treasure [a character wears a pirate hat next to an open treasure chest with glowing DNA, with the character saying, “You ho ho! I found me treasure!”]. Spike’s DNA is in the nuclei of nearly all of his body cells [a picture of DNA is connected to many cells, and a textbox says, “Nuclei = Plural of Nucleus”]. He inherited his DNA from his mother and father [the snake family tree is shown again, with DNA strands by each picture]. I can’t know for sure what Spike’s parents looked like [question marks cover the mother and father sections of the tree], but I do know that Spike inherited his DNA from them.

One fun fact: many snake species can reproduce asexually. [A red and tan snake is shown on the screen.] Had that been the case for Spike, he would have inherited all of his DNA from only one parent [the screen shows a family tree with Spike coming from one parent with the same DNA strand]. But it would still be DNA coding for traits [the amoeba sister has a speech bubble that says, “Well...that’s a whole lot easier.”].

Just like Spike, your DNA codes for your traits, and your cells can’t function without it [a DNA strand is on the screen with binary code behind it, and a cell character with his eyes going different directions]. DNA determines how tall you are, what color your eyes are, what color your hair is, or even if you’re at risk for certain diseases [There is a bubble map of DNA in the middle, with branched-off bubbles of: Height, eye color, hair color, and risk of certain diseases]. Also like Spike, your ENTIRE DNA code is in most of your body cells a cell has a DNA strand in it, with an arrow pointing and saying, “Entire DNA Code” and a person looking down at the cell on his arm]. That’s why in those crime solving shows [a cover for a fake TV show, “CSI: Amoeba” is shown with a cell and a magnified glass and a city in the background], which we may or may not absolutely love, a criminal can sometimes be caught by just leaving a cell from a hair follicle behind [a hair follicle is shown on the screen in front of the show cover].

[A DNA strand is depicted in an arc, emulating a rainbow with clouds at the bottom of either side. The screen says, “It’s so beautiful!”, “What does it mean?!”, and “Double Helix!!!”]

DNA has a beautiful structure and that structure will help you understand how inheritance works. DNA stands for deoxyribonucleic acid [this is written on the screen with “Deoxyribo” in one color, “nucleic” in another, and “Acid” in another color]. It’s a type of nucleic acid. If you remember from our biomolecules video, nucleic acids are a type of biomolecule [four boxes of different biomolecules are on the screen: Carbohydrates, lipids, proteins, and nucleic acids, and nucleic acids is in a different color from the rest].

Nucleic acids are made up of building blocks called nucleotides. [Nucleotides are diagrammed on the screen as being a structure with a pentagon (sugar), a smaller circle (phosphate) connected, and then a rectangle [nitrogenous base] that connects to the other side of the structure.] Nucleotides have 3 parts. One of them is a sugar called deoxyribose. One of them is a phosphate. We sometimes say DNA has a sugar-phosphate backbone [a spine is drawn and placed along the string of nucleotides]. But the most important part of the nucleotide is the base, because the sequence of the bases actually code for traits [the base puts on glasses, has a computer in front of it, and the following appears over the computer, “>hello world, >_”].

So as far as the bases go, there are four types of bases in DNA [the screen shows 4 different shaped bases]. A lot of times they’ll just use the letters A, T, C, G [each one is labeled one of those letters] The A is for adenine. The T is thymine. The C is for cytosine, and the G is for guanine. These bases actually pair in a specific way [the screen shows the bases paired together in the nucleotides, with G and C together and A and T together], and there is a popular mnemonic that can help you remember which of them pair together: apples in the tree; that tells you that A for apples, T for trees, because the bases A and T go together [a picture of an apple in a tree is shown]. The other verse is: car in the garage [a picture of this is shown]; that can help you remember that the base C always goes with the base G.

Regardless of whether we’re talking about Spike, or a plant, or a protist, or a human like you…these are the DNA bases in living organisms [each of these things are shown]. But the amount of DNA bases overall [two different lengths of DNA are next to each other]---and the sequence of those bases we mentioned [DNA with different colored bases are shown]----will vary among different species, and also, among different individuals. But…it’s likely to infer that Spike has a sequence of DNA bases that is more similar to his parents than he would to, say, a rattlesnake [Spike and a DNA strand are pictured, with his parents and “More similar” on the left and on the right is a rattlesnake and “Less similar”].

DNA has two strands so there are nucleotides running up one side and there’s nucleotides running up the other side [this is shown on the screen]. The bases are what pair in the middle. The bases are held together by hydrogen bonds [this is shown on the diagram]. The DNA is also twisted in something we call a double-helix shape [DNA is shown on the screen twisted in a double helix].

Portions of DNA make up genes [some sections of the DNA are a different color]. We can say, for example, that this part of the DNA here makes up a gene [the colored sections are labeled]. Genes can code for proteins. Proteins can have a huge role in expressing a trait. [The screen says, “Gene can code for protein”. The protein is depicted as a string of dots.] For example, let’s consider your own eye color [a brown eye is shown, along with the DNA strand with colored genes]. Human eye color is a pretty complex trait that is actually determined by many genes. The genes can code for proteins involved in producing the eye color pigment [each of the genes has arrows pointing to many colored genes]. But proteins coded for by genes play a wide variety of roles besides just your eye color. Proteins are involved in transport [a protein with eyes brings a package to some structure], in structure [a protein strand has a construction hat by snake scales], in acting as enzymes that can make all kinds of materials [a protein with a hammer is next to structures], in protecting the body [a protein is behind a shield next to viruses]…and so much more.

We do want to mention that not all genes are used to make protein. And there are parts of DNA that are noncoding [A part of DNA has a speech bubble saying, “These genes were made for DANCING!”. And even though nearly all of your body cells have your entire DNA code---your body cells may only use certain portions of those genes [A cell holds a DNA strand, and it has a speech bubble saying, “UGH! I can never find the part I need”]. Genes can be turned on or turned off by a variety of mechanisms [a DNA strand has light bulbs replacing the bases, and they switch on and off]. We call that gene regulation; check out our video on that.

Now you have a lot of DNA [A strand of DNA is next to a cat with a long torso, and there is a caption that says, “Much longer than longcat”]. When it is compacted, it can be organized into a unit called a chromosome [the cat goes away, and an arrow points from the DNA strand to chromosomes]. Very helpful when you’re trying to make more cells and need you to get the DNA into those new cells [a chromosome has a DNA strand unwinding from it, and the DNA loops around a circle, with the label, “Proteins provide structure”]. Chromosomes in your body involve DNA wrapped around protein structures.

Humans have 46 chromosomes. That means nearly every body cell in your body has 46 chromosomes [a person has the label “46” on his shirt, and the screen zooms in on a section of cells that all have the number 46 in each nucleus]. Human, sperm and egg cells, on the other hand, each contain 23 chromosomes [these are diagrammed with “23” in the nucleus]. So you received 23 chromosomes from your mother [the egg cell is covered by gift with a tag “From: Mom”] and 23 chromosomes from your father to give you your 46 chromosomes. Your genetic code [a person is in between the two types of cells and has a DNA strand going through, with “46” on him].

[The screen changes to say, “RECAP”.]

So let’s do a recap of the big picture: here’s a single chromosome [it is depicted in an “X” shape]. You see genes on this chromosome [a green stripe appears on a section of the chromosome and is labeled “gene”]. These genes consist of portions of DNA [that part of the chromosome is unwound into a strand of DNA, and the different-colored portion can be seen unwound]. DNA is made up of nucleotides [the nucleotide model is shown], and it’s these bases here [they are highlighted]---the sequence of them---that makes the difference in coding for traits.

Phew. Understanding this foundation is essential for understanding heredity [the amoeba sister is next to a stack of books, which has a DNA strand at the top of the pile]---whether you’re talking about you----or Spike. So this may bring up more questions now like where do dominant and recessive traits come in? What about alleles and how do you arrange those around a Punnett square [these questions are written on the screen]? You can explore those concepts and more in our heredity playlist [the other amoeba sister watches TV]. Well that’s it for the Amoeba Sisters and we remind you to stay curious!

[The screen says, “Stay Curious!”, then changes to “Drop the base” and a base from the nucleotide dressed as a DJ. Upbeat music plays.]

[End of Video]


Transcript: Punnet Squares and Sex-Linked Traits
Updated automatically every 5 minutes
BYU-Idaho Online Learning

Video Transcript

Punnet Squares and Sex-Linked Traits

[One speaker.]

[The video begins with the Amoeba Sisters title page with two happy cartoon amoebas with faces. The text at the beginning of the video says, “The Amoeba Sisters Presents.” The next slide shows the the two cartoon amoebas present the title of the video: “Sex-Linked Traits.”]

Female Voiceover: Would you like to know one of the most underappreciated pieces of cytoplasm out there? Platelets.

[Video shows a cartoon blue blob with little tentacles coming off of it with a face looking sad. Then it looks happy when the voice over says, “Platelets” and a speech bubble that says, “Hello!” appears above the cartoon platelet.]

We take for granted the function of our platelets, which are fragments of cytoplasm that help stop us from bleeding.

[Video next shows a cartoon finger with a cut and an arrow pointing at the cut reads “Paper cut”. Three cartoon platelets surround the cut. One has a speech bubble that says, “All right, recruits. This is a level one cut. Not lethal, but it still requires our attention.”]

They help our blood to clot when we get hurt.

[Next, seven cartoon platelets are squished together on a red background. One has a speech bubble that says, “Party with the platelets!!” and another speech bubble says “Ugh, these big injuries always bring out the crazies.”]

But there is a disorder called hemophilia that can affect those platelets because special clotting factor proteins that are needed to work with the platelets may not work correctly.

[Next, the video shows a green slide with the cartoon amoeba sisters pointing to the title of the slide: “HEMOPHILIA.” A cartoon platelet appears in the center of the slide. The green slide disappears and a new scene shows a cartoon platelet looking confused with red drops, presumably blood, dropping around them. They have a speech bubble that says, “Um...clotting factors?”]

So, even a basic cut could be dangerous for people with hemophilia because they could bleed continuously.

[More red drops continue to fall around the cartoon platelet and the speech bubble changes to say, “Excuse me! There is...a lot of blood here.” More red drops fall around the platelet and the speech bubble changes again to say, “SOS! SOS!”]

We have many treatments for the symptoms of Hemophilia and this has greatly improved outcomes with this disorder. Although it wasn’t always that way.

[A new slide appears with the title “Hemophilia Trait” placed in a yellow oval in the middle of the slide. Two boxes with check marks in them appear at the top of the slide. The first box is labeled “Sex-Linked” and the second is labeled “Recessive.” One of the amoeba sister cartoons appears at the bottom of the slide pointing to the title.]

Hemophilia is a sex-linked, recessive trait which means it is different from basic Mendelian genetic problems. What do I mean by that?

[The second amoeba sister cartoon appears at the bottom of the slide, looking confused. A thought bubble appears that says, “Wut?” before the slide changes. On the next slide, the word “DOMINANT” appears with two cartoon muscular arms on either side of it at the top of the slide. The word “Recessive” appears at the bottom of the slide with a cartoon turtle in its shell next to it.]

Well, we still use the terms dominant and recessive for alleles, but this time, because it’s sex-linked, the alleles are on sex chromosomes. This is the case with sex-linked traits.

[The text “Sex Chromosomes” appears in the middle of the slide with two black arrows pointing to it. One leads from the word “Dominant” above and the other leads from the word “Recessive” below. One of the cartoon amoeba sisters appears on the left side of the slide pointing to the words. The next slide appears with the title “Sex Chromosome” in the middle with yellow stars surrounding it.]

What is a sex chromosome? Recall that humans have 46 chromosomes.

[Two cartoon chromosomes, they look like popsicle sticks with faces on the top end and the words “Human Chromosome” on it, appear on the new slide. One of them has a speech bubble that says, “You think a family of 16 is bad?! Try 46!” On the next slide a chromosome shaped like an X with the label “Chromosome” appears. A string of DNA labeled “DNA” leads up from the end of one side of the X. At the end of the string of DNA, it splits apart and has two orange circles on it labeled “Proteins.”]

Chromosomes are made up of DNA and protein. They contain your genes.

[A pair of jeans, two eyes, and some buck teeth appear on top of the X chromosome. One of the amoeba sister cartoons appears on the right side of the slide with a speech bubble that says, “GENES! Not JEANS, Petunia!!” On the next slide, a row of long, black blobs are shown. The two blobs in the middle, one tall and one short, are outlined in yellow. These two blobs are then colored in and given faces. The text “SEX CHROMOSOMES!” appears at the top of the slide.]

Well, two of your 46 chromosomes, they are called the sex chromosomes.

[The next slide is titled “Human Karyotype”. There are twenty-two groupings of long, black blobs that represent chromosomes on the slide and each has a number underneath. In the middle of the slide is the text box that reads, “23 pairs = 46 chromosomes.” In the bottom right corner are the two colored blobs from the previous slide. The tall, purple blob is labeled “X” and the short, green blob is labeled “Y.”]

In a karyotype, it is usually the last two chromosomes that are the sex chromosomes. The sex chromosomes are called X and Y chromosomes, but it has nothing to do with the shape of the chromosome.

[The video zooms in on the two colored chromosomes, X and Y, and faces and little arms appear on them. On the next slide, the X and Y chromosomes are in the middle of the slide with shadows shaped like the letter they are named after behind them. Both amoeba sister cartoons are also on the slide with one of them pointing to the two chromosomes in the middle. Next, a thought bubble appears above the other amoeba sister. In the thought bubble the X and Y chromosomes are now shaped like the letter they’re named after instead of the long blob shape.]

That’s always kind of confusing, but please don’t think that Y chromosomes are shaped like a Y and X chromosomes are shaped like a X. This used to always confuse me. It has nothing to do with their name.

[The thought bubble for the amoeba sister cartoon disappears and a speech bubble for the X chromosome appears that says, “We are like wiggly-worms!” This speech bubble disappears and is replaced with a new one that says, “To the Google, my dear Watson.” The X chromosome is now wearing a Sherlock hat and pipe.]

The reason they got those names is actually kind of interesting so... to the Google for that! Everyone has an X chromosome.

[On the next slide, a cartoon of a bearded man with glasses is on the left side of the slide and an X chromosome is on the right side. The man has a speech bubble that says, “I had a X chromosome before it was cool.” The man disappears and a second X chromosome appears next to the first on the slide. A woman with long hair appears on the left side of the slide. A female symbol and equal sign leading to the two X chromosomes appears. The label “Female” also appears below the X chromosomes.]

But if you have another X chromosome, meaning you have two X chromosomes, you are female.

[The woman, female labels, and second X chromosome disappear and a Y chromosome appears next to the first X chromosome. A man with curly hair appears on the left side of the slide along with the label “Male.” A male symbol and equal sign leading to the X chromosome and Y chromosome appears.]

And if you have a Y chromosome, meaning you have a X and Y chromosome, you are male.

[On the next slide, the X and Y chromosomes are in the middle of the slide. They are looking at an additional X chromosome on the right side of the screen. The extra X chromosome has a speech bubble that says, “Oh! Are you two hanging out? Can I come, too?!”]

There are also genetic disorders where you can have extra copies of sex chromosomes, but we are not going into that for this clip.

[One of the amoeba sisters cartoons appears on the left side of the slide with a speech bubble that says, “You’re giving spoilers for another video!!” On the next slide, the X and Y chromosomes are in the middle of the slide with shadows behind them in the shape of their letter name. This time, both chromosomes have two stripes of different colors on them. The amoeba sisters are on the left and right sides of the slide.]

Sex-linked traits are traits that are specifically on the sex chromosomes. Most sex-linked traits tend to be on the X chromosome, because it is larger than the Y chromosome and contains more genes than the Y chromosome.

[The amoeba sister on the left side of the slide points to the X chromosome and more stripes of different colors appear on the X chromosome. The eyes on the X chromosome get a little bigger making the chromosome appear scared or surprised. A speech bubble appears next to the Y chromosome that says, “Are...are you okay?!” The X chromosome now looks sick and the text “*Urk*” appears beside it.]

The disorder hemophilia is like this. We will use the letter “H” to represent an allele for having normal blood clotting function and a letter lowercase “h” to represent an allele for having hemophilia.

[The text hemophilia appears at the bottom of the slide before moving onto the next slide. On the next slide, an uppercase H is in the middle of the slide. The H has two eyeballs on it. The text “(Normal blood clotting function)” and “NO hemophilia” appear in the top left corner of the slide with an arrow pointing to the uppercase H. A lowercase H with eyeballs appears at the bottom of the slide. The next “Having hemophilia” with an arrow pointing to the lowercase H appears on the right side of the slide.]

Hemophilia is a sex-linked recessive disorder, which is why it is being represented by a lowercase letter h. Only, it must be placed on the sex chromosomes as a superscript. Like an exponent.

[On the next slide, the uppercase H with eyeballs is on the left side of the slide, the lowercase H with eyeballs is on the right side of the slide, and one of the amoeba sister cartoons is in the bottom right corner pointing to the two Hs. The two Hs disappear and the text “XhXh” with the lowercase Hs raised slightly above the Xs like an exponent appears in the middle of the slide. The next slide appears where there is one woman on the right side of the slide and one on the left side.]

A woman that does not have hemophilia could have the genotype XHXH or XHXh. Because as long as she’s got at least one dominant allele, that dominating allele will be what shows. So, no hemophilia. Since, again, hemophilia is a recessive sex-linked disorder.

[The following text appears below the woman on the left side of the slide: “XHXH, Homozygous DOMINANT.” Next, the following text appears below the woman on the right side of the slide: “XHXh, Heterozygous.” Red circles appear around the uppercase Hs on the slide. The red circles disappear and the text “NO Hemophilia” appears in the middle of the slide.]

The only way for her to have hemophilia would be the genotype XhXh. Because only when there is no dominant present will that recessive show up, at least in this type of trait.

[On the next slide, another woman appears in the middle of the slide with the text “XhXh, Homozygous Recessive” beneath her. Red circles appear around the lowercase Hs on the slide. The next slide shows a man on the left side of the slide with the text “XHY” below him.]

Now, for a male to not have hemophilia, his genotype would have to be XHY. Notice how I didn’t put anything on the Y chromosome. Again, most sex linked traits are on the X chromosome.

[One of the amoeba sister cartoons appears at the bottom of the slide in the middle. She points to the “Y” in the text below the man. The amoeba sister disappears and another man appears on the right side of the slide with the text “XhY” below him. The text “No Hemophilia” appears at the top of the slide with an arrow below it pointing to the first man. The text “Hemophilia” appears in the middle of the slide with an arrow pointing to the second man.]

If he has the genotype XhY, then he has hemophilia. He doesn’t have two X chromosomes. So, he cannot be a carrier.

[One of the amoeba sisters appears at the bottom middle of the slide and points to the second man. On the next slide, a man and a woman holding hands appear in the middle of the slide. The text “NO HEMOPHILIA” appears below them before disappearing. The text “Carrier (Heterozygous)” appears on the right side of the woman with an arrow pointing to her.]

So, let’s say two people that do not have hemophilia have children. However, let’s say the woman is a carrier. That means she is heterozygous. How do you do a sex-linked Punnett square cross for this kind of trait?

[One of the amoeba sisters appears in the bottom right corner of the slide with the speech bubble that says, “Science magic!” The amoeba sister and text on the slide disappear. In the top left corner the text “Step 1” appears in a yellow box. The text “XHXh” appears on the right side of the woman and the text “Identify genotypes!” appears below the two people.]

Step 1: Identify the genotypes of the parents. So the mother was a carrier. She is XHXh. She doesn’t have hemophilia because of the dominant allele present, but she is a carrier. The male, if he does not have hemophilia, must be XHY. There’s no other option for him.

[The text “Identify genotypes!” disappears and the text “(Heterozygous)” appears next to the woman. A red circle surrounds the uppercase H in the text “XHXh.” The red circle disappears and another red circle surrounds the lowercase H. The text “XHY” appears on the left side of the man. The previous red circle disappears and another red circle surrounds the uppercase H next to the man.]

Step 2: Place one parent on the top, outside of the square like this. Place the other parent on the left, outside of the square, like this.

[On the next slide, the text “Step 2” appears in a blue box in the top left corner of the slide. In the middle of the slide is a large white box divided into four other boxes. Above the table is the woman with the text “XH” on the left side of her and the text “Xh” on the right side of her. The man appears on the left side of the table with the text “XH” above him and the text “Y” below him.]

Step 3: Cross them! For formatting purposes, place X chromosomes before Y. You also write any sex chromosomes with dominant letters first.

[The text “Step 3” inside a green box replaces the previous blue box in the top left corner. The text “Cross them!” appears on the right side of the table. Different combinations of the man and the woman’s chromosomes appear in the table. First box = “XHXH.” Second box = “XHXh.” Third box = “XHY.” Fourth box = “XhY.” The text “Cross them!” disappears and red circles surround the uppercase Xs in the table. The red circles disappear and new ones surround the uppercase Hs in the table. The rec circles then disappear.]

The results you get in the squares would be the offspring, the babies.

[Cartoon children then appear in the bottom right corners of the boxes in the tables. The top two children are girls, while the bottom two children are boys.]

The genotype ratio could be written out like this.

[On the next slide, the four children are placed in a row with their corresponding chromosomes underneath them. The order of the children is girl, girl, boy, boy. The text underneath them reads, “1XHXH:1XHXh:1XHY:1XhY” with each genotype underneath the child it corresponds to. The text “Genotype Ratio” is at the bottom of the slide. A miniaturized version of the table from the previous slide is in the bottom right corner of this slide.]

The phenotype ratio—remember that these are the traits—can be written out that there is a 75% chance that a child will be born without hemophilia and a 25% chance that a child would have hemophilia, for this boy here.

[The 1s and colons in the chromosome text disappear along with the text “Genotype Ratio.” The text “Phenotype Ratio” appear at the bottom of the slide along with a pie graph next to it. The pie graph is labeled “75% NO Hemophilia” and “25% Hemophilia” with two different colors representing the ratio. The text “Phenotype Ratio” disappears and three arrows leading from the first three children to the 75% area of the pie graph appear in its place. Another arrow leading from the last child to the 25% area of the pie graph. A red circle appears around the last child briefly before disappearing. ]

You could also make this a ratio so, three to one.

[The arrows disappear. A rectangle appears around the first three children to show that they don’t have hemophilia and a separate rectangle appears around the last child to show that he does have it. The text “3:1 Ratio” appears in the top right corner of the slide.]

Notice that in this type of example of a sex-linked recessive disorder males are more likely to inherit this disorder because there is only one X chromosome present. This is true for many other sex linked recessive disorders, such as color blindness.

[On the next slide, the table from the previous slides with the different combinations of chromosomes is in the middle of the slide. The two amoeba sisters are also on the slide. On the left and one on the right. The right one is pointing to the table. A red circle briefly appears around the fourth box with the text “XhY” before disappearing.]

Well, that’s it for the amoeba sisters and we remind you to stay curious!

[The next slide shows the amoeba sisters title page. The next slide has the text “Stay Curious” in the middle of the slide with the amoeba sisters on either side wearing sunglasses. The next slide has the text “Ever been so bored that you put jeans on a karyotype?” and a clip art version of a pair of jeans below it. The next slide shows the twenty-two pairs of chromosomes each with a pair of jeans on. The X and Y chromosomes in the bottom right corner have eyeballs and smiles and are each wearing just one pant leg of jeans. One of the amoeba sisters is frustrated at the bottom of the page with the text bubble that says, “PETUNIA!”

The final slide has a column of three other videos made by the Amoeba Sisters YouTube Channel. In the middle of the slide is the following text in a blue circle: “Support Us By Subscribing!” In the top right corner is the text “Check out our website!” with an arrow pointing to the Amoeba Sisters logo below the text. One of the amoeba sister cartoons is upside down at the top of the slide and the other is in the bottom right corner of the slide. At the bottom of the slide is the Twitter logo and the text “@AmoebaSisters.” ]

[End of video.]

